---
layout: post
title: General information on self-help
---

## What is self-help?

> Finding one's own in others, personal initiative and self-determination

The essence of self-help is mutual help on the basis of equal concern. Self-help means taking your own problems and their solutions into your own hands and becoming active within the scope of your own possibilities.

Self-help groups bring together people who share a common theme and who suffer from the same illness, disability or emotional conflict situation. Relatives of those affected also organize themselves in self-help groups.

Self-help groups and organizations are also forums in which sick people, patients and users of healthcare facilities can acquire the knowledge and skills they need to better cope with their illness, but also to better assert themselves as 'consumers' in the healthcare market. They partially eliminate the isolation of patients from providers and cost bearers. In self-help initiatives, sick people organize their own lobby structures.

Groups and organizations, e.g. of chronically ill people, are therefore now accepted and sought-after partners of professional care in the healthcare system. They provide important complementary services, or they provide a part of the information, help, care and health promotion that the institutional and professional sector is not willing or able to provide. 

### Self-help groups

Are discussion groups of a manageable number of people

- are self-determined, i.e. the content and working methods of the group are determined by the members
- require active and continuous participation from their members
- are not usually led by professional helpers
- meet regularly on fixed dates (e.g. weekly, fortnightly or once a month)

In joint discussions at the regular group meetings

- individuals experience relief and support from the other members and
- see that they are not alone with their problem
- they learn to recognize their difficulties, deal with them and overcome them
- The focus of the group work is on sharing experiences and information

In health or illness-related self-help groups, members inform each other, e.g. about treatment options for their illness, medication and side effects or also about issues relating to disability law or care and health insurance.

Self-help groups are voluntary associations of people whose activities are primarily geared towards the wishes and needs of the group members. The focus is on overcoming the common problem within the group. Although this support is more inward-looking, the members not only help themselves, but also help each other in exchange.

## How do self-help groups work?
By working together in a self-help group, social, psychological and/or illness-related stresses can be overcome more easily. The essence of self-help is “finding oneself in others” and thus, above all, community.

Members of self-help groups can:

- meet and exchange ideas on an equal footing
- support each other in overcoming their difficulties
- acquire new knowledge about their personal problem situation
- develop different ways of dealing with the problem
- Reduce social isolation and fears
- undertake joint activities
- learn to deal confidently with professionals (e.g. doctors)
- develop new life contents and perspectives and
- better identify and represent common concerns and interests
- encourage each other to assert their rights.

Many members of self-help groups have found that they are better able to cope with stress. They often deal with their problems more independently and self-confidently than other people in comparable situations.

## What can't self-help groups do?

Self-help groups are forms of support by lay people for lay people. They are therefore not suitable for people in acute crises, who generally need professional and competent help.

The positive effects of group work do not appear overnight. It takes time for positive changes to become noticeable through active participation in the self-help group. People in an acute crisis do not have this time. In addition, acute crises of individuals could overwhelm the group.

Self-help groups cannot replace medical or psychotherapeutic treatment, but they can usefully supplement or support it.

It is important that the members participate continuously and actively in the group process. Self-help groups are associations from which those affected can obtain experience and request material. However, they are usually completely overwhelmed if they are used exclusively as a source of information and help. The groups can only function if there is mutual give and take. 

Self-help groups arise from the self-determined and independent commitment of those affected or their relatives. The motivation for this is based on the desire to change one's own situation and to exchange experiences with people who have similar problems. Members of self-help groups communicate on the same level as those affected and thus enable authentic mutual understanding. This is not usually possible for professional helpers.

Self-help initiatives are therefore an essential complement to professional help. Above all, they compensate for psychosocial deficits.
