---
layout: post
title: Self-Help Groups Complex Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
---

Welcome, we’re glad you’re here! We are a group (now an association of groups) of people who support each other on the often difficult and complex journey of healing from CPTSD.

We have several groups: online groups, a Berlin group, a reading group, a nervous system regulation exercise group, two reading & exercise groups. The group size is 4-9 participants each. The Berlin group meets in Moabit, all other groups take place online. All times are in CET time zone, and you can join from anywhere around the world.

It is important to us to treat each other with respect, appreciation and consideration. We offer a safe space to support each other on our healing journey. We meet anonymously. Everything remains confidential. We use free, open-source and end-to-end encrypted software. All meetings follow specific group rules, which ensure a safe environment. 

The self-help group is no substitute to therapy. You will find that previous therapy experience will help you in this format. We would like to underline that you can only participate, if you know how to regulate your nervous system and you are generally sufficiently stabilized.


If you’re interested, please email us at <a href="mailto:mail@kptbs.de">mail@kptbs.de</a> and we're looking forward to getting to know you.

## Contents
* [Calendar](#calendar)
* [Group rules](#group-rules)
* [Groups overview](#groups-overview)
* [Meeting structure](#meeting-structure)
* [CPTSD diagnosis](#cptsd-diagnosis)
* [General information on self-help](#general-information-on-self-help)
* [CPTSD self-help](#cptsd-self-help)
