---
layout: post
title: Group Rules
---

All participants committ to our rules in order to foster a safe space:

1. Common sense: all rules follow from the goal of creating a supportive safe space, rules can never be complete or 100% clear.
2. Personal responsibility: you take responsibility for yourself, your feelings, boundaries and actions. You pay attention to your needs and communicate them carefully with us. 
3. The usual rules of conversation apply: Let people finish, talk to each other respectfully and mindfully.
4. Everything that is discussed in the group is confidential and does not leave the group. Anonymity: We address each other by our first names.
5. Disturbances have priority: anyone who is particularly affected by what is being said interrupts the current speaker and communicates this. We do not talk about trauma content and avoid descriptions of any form of violence.
6. We do not tolerate intolerance or any form of violence and aggression (insults, discrimination, shouting, etc.).
7. Every member speaks for themselves, avoid generalizations and group-related descriptions. We do not give advice, evaluate or therapy each other.
8. Participation in the meeting under the influence of (and consumption during) legal or illegal drugs is prohibited.
9. It is not possible for the group to take responsibility for participants in an acute crisis. For this, those affected must turn to therapists, doctors, crisis hotlines, etc. It is not possible to join and participate if you are actively suicidal.
10. All members are part of the group because they are affected themselves. There is no leader. The moderation is done by experienced group members and we strive for everyone to take on the responsibility of moderation at all times.
11. Religion and politics have no place in our discussions. This primarily means “proselytizing”, talking about how one is personally affected by society's collective turning a blind eye to environmental destruction is world affairs and not politics, the recommendation to vote for a particular party is.
12. Lateral thinkers, conspiracy theorists, fanatics and extremists are not welcome here. We believe in scientific methods and results. Facts and opinions must be kept separate.
13. In online groups/meetings, the cameras are always on, the microphones only when speaking.
14. Groups with less than 9 people are open to new participants, larger groups vote if they want to accept new members.
15. Anyone who no longer wishes to be part of the group or will be absent for more than three meetings informs the group about this.
