---
layout: post
title: CPTSD diagnosis
---

Complex Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (CPTSD) was defined for the first time in ICD-11 as an independent diagnosis (6B41).

The first version of the ICD-11 was written in 2011, the final version in 2018. The WHO, which publishes the ICD (International Classification of Diseases), has recommended using the ICD-11 since 2019. In Germany, the ICD-11 has been legally valid since 2022-01-01. 

Unfortunately, it will be many years before therapists, psychiatrists, doctors and health insurance companies are familiar with the ICD-11 and CPTSD and thus until it is diagnosed. The reasons for this are that (as of 2024) ICD-11 has not yet arrived in teaching and training. Only a few specialists are continuing their own training in this area. IT systems have not yet been updated to ICD-11 and there is no deadline by which ICD-11 is mandatory. Therefore, ICD-10 - which is outdated from a scientific perspective - will be used in most cases in the foreseeable future, resulting in frequent misdiagnoses. This is dramatic because an incorrect diagnosis makes successful treatment much less likely. At present (2024), most of those affected still come across the diagnosis by chance (through books, videos, articles, etc.), and for the reasons mentioned above, it is difficult to obtain a reliable diagnosis from a doctor or psychologist. In general, Dr. Google is not recommended, and a reliable diagnosis is not yet possible online. However, if you suspect that you have PTSD, it can be helpful to familiarize yourself with the topic and the diagnostic criteria to find the motivation to seek out trained specialists.

Good luck with your search, you will need it.

Here are the [ICD-11 CPTSD diagnostic criteria](https://icd.who.int/browse/2024-01/mms/en#585833559). 

Complex post traumatic stress disorder (Complex PTSD) is a disorder that may develop following exposure to an event or series of events of an extremely threatening or horrific nature, most commonly prolonged or repetitive events from which escape is difficult or impossible (e.g. torture, slavery, genocide campaigns, prolonged domestic violence, repeated childhood sexual or physical abuse). All diagnostic requirements for PTSD are met. In addition, Complex PTSD is characterised by severe and persistent 1) problems in affect regulation; 2) beliefs about oneself as diminished, defeated or worthless, accompanied by feelings of shame, guilt or failure related to the traumatic event; and 3) difficulties in sustaining relationships and in feeling close to others. These symptoms cause significant impairment in personal, family, social, educational, occupational or other important areas of functioning.

The criteria for PTSD must therefore be met, but the challenge with the diagnosis is that CPTSD and PTSD sometimes differ significantly in terms of symptoms and CPTSD is therefore not recognized. 

The [PTSD diagnostic criteria according to (6B40)](https://icd.who.int/browse/2024-01/mms/en#2070699808):

Post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) may develop following exposure to an extremely threatening or horrific event or series of events. It is characterised by all of the following: 1) re-experiencing the traumatic event or events in the present in the form of vivid intrusive memories, flashbacks, or nightmares. Re-experiencing may occur via one or multiple sensory modalities and is typically accompanied by strong or overwhelming emotions, particularly fear or horror, and strong physical sensations; 2) avoidance of thoughts and memories of the event or events, or avoidance of activities, situations, or people reminiscent of the event(s); and 3) persistent perceptions of heightened current threat, for example as indicated by hypervigilance or an enhanced startle reaction to stimuli such as unexpected noises. The symptoms persist for at least several weeks and cause significant impairment in personal, family, social, educational, occupational or other important areas of functioning.
